This is Martha Hunt interviewing Dr. Ruth
Schaefer, November 16, 1985, on women in
academia.
Dr. Schaefer, how long have you been teaching at
the university level?
Let's see.
Almost 35 years. 35 years. And how long has that
been at A&M? 15. 15. Where did you go to school for
your graduate and undergraduate degrees? I did my
undergraduate degree at Hunter College in New
York, and then I received a master's at Penn State
and a doctorate at the University of North
Carolina in Chapel Hill. And what made you decide
to become a professor?
Well, I'm
not really sure that I ever did decide to become a
professor. When I was a junior or lower senior, I
was intrigued by a group of studies that we read in
sociology. these were community studies and I
thought it would be fun to make community studies
and so I decided to go on in graduate school as a
natural course of that interest and make
community studies.
Did you feel it was a choice that you had to make
between having a family and having a career? No.
Now, I did have one experience. I decided just
before I graduated from college that I would apply
to
Gettysburg Seminary to become a Lutheran
minister. And I was rejected. I don't even know
whether there were any Lutheran women clergy at
that time. But my other choice was to
go into sociology and become a researcher.
don't think that I even thought. I just assumed
that someday I would meet someone and fall in love
and marry and that everything would just fit in. I
never
even gave it a moment's thought that this was a
choice between one or the other. When you applied
to seminary, do you feel that you were rejected
because you were a woman? Yes. Oh, yes. Yes,
absolutely. And in fact, we were talking about
this the other day because at the University of
North Carolina was a woman who was the first
president of the Southern. She was an officer in
the American society. She wrote many books and was
editor of Social Forces, which is one of our major
journals. And she also was Lutheran. And when she
finished her PhD at North Carolina, she applied to
teach at a small Lutheran college, and they
rejected her. And then something like 15 years
later, they asked her if she would come and teach in
a Lutheran college. By that time, she was one of the
top women sociologists in the country. And I think
they wanted to offer her something like $6,000 a
year. Oh, my goodness. So she rejected it at that
time. But in her case, too, it was the fact that
women were just not accepted. But that didn't mean
women were... A church-related school was very
different from a state school. There were... I
went to a women's college on the undergraduate
level So I had a lot of role models probably. That's
why it never dawned on me that one made a choice
between a career and marriage because almost all
my professors were married and had children and
were pursuing their careers as well. What is your
definition of a liberated woman or a feminist?
I'm not sure that I've ever given a great deal of
thought.
And I'm not sure that
some of the connotations of liberated and
feminist, I'm not sure that they're the same. I
think they have different meanings. I think they
have different meanings. And I think you have to
remember that I come from a little bit different
tradition than some of the younger women faculty.
And that basically, while I was discriminated
against in terms of salary level, I never suffered
some of the discrimination that some of the later,
that some women colleagues have suggested that
they suffered. So that I, my position has always
been that a woman did deserve, if she was filling a
similar position, the same salary levels and same
opportunities as men. I look on this as equality
rather than liberation or feminist or so on. And
frankly, one of the problems that I have had early
on at Texas A&M and one of the problems that I had in
graduate school for a short time was the fact that
people differentiate between male and female
scientists. I see. Well, do you feel that... You
have been, say, following your husband around
because he was a sociologist. Okay, okay. I taught
after I received my master's. I originally wanted
to go straight on after finishing my master's for a
doctor. And I worked under a man who, I guess one of
the reasons that, I didn't recognize a lot of
discrimination was I was always very lucky and
worked under marvelous people. And at Penn State I
worked under a man named William G. Mather, who at
the tender age of late 80s was working very
actively in retirement in Florida for women's
rights and for the passage of ERA. While he never
discussed any of these areas, except human rights
in general. He didn't differentiate between
women and so on. He was very active. He took me on. He
sought me out and offered me the position of his
research assistant. And he is a superb human
being. And so I didn't have that kind of
experience. And I think I've missed your question
somewhere there. Oh, I was just talking about when
you came to A&M, when you received a job at A&M, was
your husband also? Oh, the following, okay. Okay,
so I worked first and taught at the University of
Rochester after the Masters. He said, this is not
going to be a rural society, and don't go on in rural
sociology. And so he literally forced me, found me
a job teaching at the University of Rochester,
when I went home over the Christmas holidays, I
came back, I had this job, because he didn't really
want me to go on. And he was right, you know, this is
not a rural society. At that time, I was the only
woman member of the, as a graduate student, I was
the only female member of the rural sociological
society. So he was very wise. Okay, so I taught at
Rochester for about a year and a half before going
on for my doctorate at North Carolina. And I was, I
had made all my own decisions. Okay. I met my
husband when I was just about finished the doctor.
And he was behind me because he'd been in the
service and went back to school after completing
longing. So that when we married, I then literally
did follow him. And I never ever had any problem
getting a job. But he always had the job. It was
never a matter of, it's your turn now, or that kind
of thing. And I recognize that that is partly the
case. But in some respects, because we have had
some experience here in attempting to recruit
women, I'm not sure that that truly works. I see.
And the reason I'm not sure, if you're interested
in why I'm not sure, is that on several occasions we
have offered positions to women who are married.
And we raised the question with them, what happens
if we offer you a position and your husband does not
get a position in the area? And their comment was,
we will come regardless because it is our turn. But
none of them when it came down to the nuts and bolts,
ever did. They always went wherever both partners
could get a job. Oh, well, that's very
interesting. So I'm not sure that this works.
Well,
when you received a job offer here, or your husband
did and you did, was there a discrimination as far
as As far as salary, because he was a man? When we
came, we were finishing up a book. We came in June
instead of waiting until the end of the summer. And
I wrote a letter to all the divisions of the
university that I felt might be receptive to a
sociologist. I had had experiences at Alabama
where I could teach in the sociology department,
but I could only teach one course because my
husband was also teaching. And so a school of
social work was developed, and the dean was just a
truly outstanding person. And an old friend of
mine had worked with him in Rochester and later in
California, so when he was announced that he was to
come as the dean of a new school of social work, I
contacted him and asked him whether he was
interested in employing me. So I taught research
methods and sociological type things in the
School of Social Work. So I was full time, my
husband was full time. When I came here, I didn't
think there would be a chance of a job in sociology.
And so I wrote all these letters and different
people interviewed me. One day I went in and was
interviewed by a man named Earl Cook, who was to
become dean of geosciences shortly after our
interview. And he employed me part time with a
research program that he had. So I had a
considerable number of publications and several
books. And so at that time, Texas A&M was trying to
expand its horizon and to upgrade faculty. It was
the beginning of that period. And so he employed me
immediately. into this program. And then one week
before the beginning of the fall semester, the
young man who taught power and community left. I
mean, just left. And so Dr. Scribonic called me and
asked me whether I would come and teach those
courses. And being Dr. Scribonic, he repeated
again and again that he did not know whether this
would work into a full-time position or, you know,
a full-time appointment. And at that time, Texas
had a rule that stated that a husband and wife
could not work in the same department, one under
the other. That's interesting. And in fact, I
think that rule still stands. In other words, if
one of us were to become head of a department, I
don't think that the other one could work under
him. Because I think Shirley Black and Bryson
Gooch had that problem when they married. In
history. Oh, that's interesting. Speaking of the
publications that you have had, do you feel that
you were ever turned down to have something
published because you were a woman? No. No. No, I
have never had that problem. Do you feel that you
had to work harder to get where you are today than
your husband had to? Do you feel that in school you
had to work harder in getting a job because you're a
woman?
No. I never really had very much difficulty, and I
guess I've always worked hard.
Did
you receive less encouragement for your
achievements? Or were you always encouraged by
your parents and your professors and other
colleagues?
That's a difficult question. I'm from a New
England family. And
my parents just always had the expectation that I
would do well or that I would work hard because in
the New England family you work hard in the
Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.
My parents were always encouraging.
My mother and father never believed that there
wasn't anything. I mean, it never dawned on me that
there would be a problem in a career because one was
a woman.
Do you ever feel that male colleagues would avoid
you or feel that what you had to say was
unimportant? No. I don't think so. I think that
that's a complicated question because it doesn't
take a few things into consideration. For
example, when I meet a new colleague, male or
female, let's say in another department, I don't
accept them just because they're another
colleague. I kind of look them over and I listen to
them. And if I'm going to work with them, I
determine what their qualifications are and I
assess them. I think everyone has the right to
assess someone that they're going to be working
with, male or female. It doesn't really make any
difference. And so I would expect people to assess
me and to use the skills that I have. just as I use the
skills that other people have. There are several
people on campus that I use whenever I need advice
or whenever some area comes up that I need special
help. And people use me in the same way. Did you ever
or have you ever experienced sexism from male
professors?
I guess it depends on how you define sexism.
When I came to Texas A&M, I had a different
experience than I had... Well, that's not true. I
guess, let's go back to Alabama. I had a superb dean
who gave me every opportunity. I could travel.
There was nothing that I wanted to do that I could
not do. But my salary was low. Well, I guess at one
point, When I went on to the faculty of the School of
Social Work, he asked me, and I was the first
faculty member besides him, he asked me what rank I
wanted. And my husband was an associate, and he was
coming up for a full professorship. So I said, and I
guess one would interpret this as,
well, interpret it any way you wish. I said, no, let
me, my husband's an associate and he's coming up
for a full, so give me an associate rank and when he
comes up for a full, then bring me up to a full. So
the dean followed through on my wishes. My salary
was less than people he was bringing in to start
this new school. I had more, I worked side by side
with him, and I was his chief confidant in the
development of the school, and he literally could
not have done it without me. I was also his dean of
admissions, and so on and so forth, director of
admissions. Then my husband, within about four or
five months, became a full professor. So I
expected that I would become a full professor, and
I didn't. So the following year, I said to my dean,
when are you going to make me a full professor? And
he said, well, the time is not right. And I said,
it'll never be righter. I said, put my name in. He
said, well, I don't think you'll get it. I said, put
my name in. And so I got it. And one of the vice
presidents who I knew at the university said to the
dean, how come you didn't make her a full professor
to begin with? I don't know why the dean did that.
But I think he didn't want to go up on my salary,
which you automatically had to do, because he was
trying to recruit somebody who was going to come
high. So in a sense, you see, that was
discriminating. While I was not discriminated
against in terms of the work, I have always had
trouble with salary. Then here, on
a couple of occasions, my salary was low. And it was
kept low. The only increases I got were when the
dean gave it to me. And
when Dr. Gaston came, he started moving my salary
up. But I don't, I think in a strange way, this was
not a reflection of my sex. It was a reflection of
the fact that I tended to fight a department head.
for the rights of younger faculty, because we had
younger faculty who were not being moved up, and
preference being given to others, and so I would go
in and fight for them. And so this was what
aggravated this person.
It was not the fact that I was female, it was the fact
that I was an irritant. And in a sense, Marcia, let
me say that being married has its advantages.
Because I have done this, I did this in Alabama, and
I have been able to do this because if I lost my job,
we always have my husband. So I felt it's given me
more independence. That's good. What have been
some problems in your home life due to your career?
Or do you feel that there's been any? I
think that probably academia, better than some
professional areas, fits better in with family
life. Certainly many women selected education
early on because you could teach in elementary
school and high school and still care for your
family and that kind of thing. And so it
has worked well. Only on a couple of occasions have
I had
some conflicts in terms of time. And I taught in
Michigan right up to a very short time before my
daughter was born and went back. about a month
after. So that fit very well in. When I went to
Alabama,
I needed someone to care for my daughter while I was
at school. And
the situation there was a little bit different
than Michigan, so for a semester I had some
arranging to do. But it usually fit in very well,
and children, young children, are pretty good as
long as, if you're home, you can be working and
writing after school, and you just have to water
and feed children, and then they'll let you go
ahead and do what you want to do. So it's worked out
real well. What are some times in your life that you
have felt discriminated against?
Marcia, just the situations on salary.
I really have not I've had people who have treated
me differently because I was a woman. When I first
came to Texas A&M, I was, I didn't realize that
there were, I think there was one other woman full
professor.
And I was suddenly on a lot of doctoral committees.
I would be
grad rep in committee after committee all over
campus and I didn't realize that this was an effort
of Dr. Quincy to begin to get a woman on a committee
because all committees and every committee I
served on I was the only woman and on the committees
until people got to know me well they would begin by
asking me to ask questions first and usually on an
exam the first questions go to the people within
the department and certainly not to a grad rep and
even when I was on a committee in another
department because the student was minoring in
sociology or something like this they would
always turn to me first Then after a while, in some
of the departments where I appeared on committee
after committee, I would say, look, no more of
this. And then after that, it was just like I was
just another faculty member in their department.
So I'm not too difficult. In the 1950s, women were
viewed or stereotyped as being intuitive.
emotional, independent, while men were viewed as
more intelligent, independent, and rational.
How do you feel about this? Do you feel that this has
changed over the past 30 years? I
guess so.
When I started graduate school at North Carolina,
I decided, because I had done so much research in
the health area, in the sociology of health, that I
would minor in public health. And I worked under a
man named Cecil Sheps, who is head of health
affairs at the University of North Carolina now.
Very brilliant man. And
he had had, I was not interested in assistantship.
I had saved money, and I wanted to go through as
quickly as possible. It's not really the best way
to go through graduate school. It's much better to
become a professor's assistant. You learn more,
and also the professor takes a greater interest in
you, may help with employment and that kind of
thing.
Dr. Sheps had had a woman assistant, and when I
started coursework in the School of Public Health
under him, He was kind of shy of me at first. And
after about four weeks, he called me into his
office and he said, will you accept an
assistantship? And at the end of four weeks, I
began to realize how expensive graduate school
was. And so I told him I would. And he said, I want to
apologize for not offering you an assistantship
when you came. And he said, but I have just gone
through two women assistants who, if I said one
crossword or if I did not use all the niceties, they
would fall apart and start to cry. And he said, I
just didn't think I could stand that again. Sheps
is the kind of person who, he didn't have a
discriminatory bone in his body. But what he was
reacting to were experiences that he had had. He
had never objected to having a woman. It was just
what he had experienced. And there were a lot of
women who role-played women and would use a lot of
excuses for not doing this. I think women do cry
more readily than men. but if you're going to work
with men, you better be able to take it. And this was
not one of my problems. I could take it well. I might
cry about other things. If I get angry, I either cry
or storm. And the important thing is to storm, not
cry. But he had a bad experience, and so he reacted
to that. When he got to know me better, there was no
problem. But he did not like to necessarily use all
the nice. If he wanted something done, he didn't
always want to say please. He didn't always want to
say thank you. It was understood by the way he
treated you and by the confidence that he had in
you. And there are a lot of people who wanted all the
rest. Have your achievements or your being a
professor and having a career made you feel less
feminine? No, no. And I like being a woman.
I like it too. Women tend to hold lower
expectations of what they can accomplish. Why do
you feel that this is so? And have you ever had
feelings or felt that because you're a woman you
can't accomplish certain achievements? Marcia,
I never did. And I think some of this is not
necessarily...
I don't know why this is true. I guess I came from a
family where women had always done things. Now, my
mother would say, well, she was robbed of certain
opportunities. But some of the opportunities,
she was robbed by her mother. But my mother, my
grandmother had three factories. My grandfather
and his brothers manufactured jewelry.
Grandmother was off. She had mesh bag factories. I
don't know whether you know what a mesh bag is. The
little evening bags. Oh, yes. Well, these were
very, very popular early on in the century. And my
grandmother had three factories that
manufactured them. And
my mother, if she had stayed in Providence, Rhode
Island, could have done things like that. She
handled payroll as a young child, but she was very
good at hat design, and she was offered a position
in New York, and my grandmother wouldn't let her go
because people thought of New York as being the big
bad city. And so Mother always felt that her career
was stifled, you see, because of being a woman. But
it was her mother that really prevented her from
doing this, not the chance to do it.
Have you ever felt isolated because you were a
woman?
What do you mean by isolated? Set apart from others
or that, you know, in the department you were just
kind of set aside because you were a woman? No, not,
except for the business, the exams.
I think a lot depends on how you role-play in your
career and how... I
don't know. There has been an awful lot of talk
about the role of women and the problems of women.
And I think that after a while you can believe that
all of this is true. And I know for some women it has
been true. But it's also true for some men.
For a long time, departments were really antsy
about employing single men. And so really lots of
departments discriminated against single men
because if you have a married man, you knew that he
wasn't going to be off and running to another job if
he didn't like the way things were going. So there
are all kinds of factors that affect both males and
females in the job market. That's interesting.
What effect did your parents have on you becoming a
professor? You said that they were real
supportive. Have they always been supportive in
everything that you did? Yes, they were always
supportive. Always supportive in education.
uh... always supported in giving me time to uh...
to uh... to study uh... limiting limiting the
uh... the kinds of things your a child is expected
to do around the house when you have studies to do
and all that but uh... I think my father thought
very strongly about education and so did my
mother. That's great.
How have you found that men and women are
evaluated? Are men and women evaluated
differently in terms of their work and their
achievements?
Oh, I think they can be. And just because I have not
had
difficult experiences doesn't mean that other
women have not.
I think that there are positions where, as changes
began to occur, women were in a sense isolated. I
had a friend at North Carolina who became the first
woman executive with a major insurance company in
Hartford, Connecticut. and she could carry her
own. She
was a very objective kind of person, but for a
while, until they really got to know her, she was
kind of isolated. I think that you can interpret
everything everyone says as being against a
woman. They say this to me because I'm a woman. They
may say these things if you are a man, and you've got
to learn to differentiate.
And also, I think that there is a normalcy of
behavior that sometimes women who are so enamored
of freedom and the feminist movement miss. For
example, I have had colleagues who will never
discuss the fact that they're married. In fact,
you wouldn't even know they were married unless
they happened to tell you. I mean, unless
something happened and it came to your attention.
They may have children, they will never discuss
their children. Now, males Always do. I mean,
they'll talk about their children, they'll talk
about their wife. So that women who
characteristically don't do this stand out as
different. I mean, with older faculty who always
talk about their children and talk about this and
talk about that, we all know about each other. And
for a woman to come on the scene and never do this,
Why do you think they don't talk about their
children? Well, what they say is that if I talk
about this, then they're going to judge me as a
woman. Instead of seeing this as part of the
behavior, as just human behavior, to talk about
your family and so on. And the interesting thing is
most of these women have husbands who were really
exceptional. And I think it's a shame not not to
share your total life. When you came to A&M, were
there any women's organizations such as now? No,
no. In fact, I was in this research program, and I
was housed in a little temporary building where
Blocker is. And I just assumed there were tons of
women all over. And because we did not have a
faculty club, the fact that we do not have a faculty
club I think is very limiting. I mean, a real
faculty club, not a room in the bottom of or
something like that, but a real faculty club.
Because in the faculty club, both male and female
faculty are seen in informal occasions by each
other. And you do family kinds of things if there is
a restaurant. At the University of Alabama, we had
a marvelous faculty club in an old mansion. And we
had a lovely dining room. And the cook was a gourmet
cook and published cookbooks. And there were
weddings there. There were all kinds of things.
And people got to see each other in a variety of
situations. I just assumed there were women all
over this campus. And it was a big shock to me later
to find out that there were not. Now, I had signs,
but I never read them right. Because I had a lot of
students who would come to see me, particularly
male students, that were having problems and
wanted to talk to someone. And there were so few
people to talk to. for whatever reason, it always
seems easier to talk to a woman. So any students
that I had in class very often would come to see me.
And some of their friends would often, you know, go
see Dr. Shaffer. And I really was not running a
casework. And I should have recognized the fact
that we also didn't have adequate counseling and
that there were very few women on campus. Have you
ever been a member of NOW or any other women's
organizations? No, I've spoken to NOW on several
occasions because one of my former students is
very active in that organization. What types of
changes in favor of women have occurred at A&M
besides the hiring of more women?
Well, I think the hiring of women has been
important. But with the growth of what I would
distinguish as the new faculty, Most of these
people came from parts of the country where there
were more women on the faculty
than Texas A&M had previously had. And so they
accepted women without any difficulty. And also
the fact that a lot of people in academia have wives
who have degrees or have advanced education in
some area, and so they accept more readily women in
the marketplace than, let's say, in corporate
America. But it's interesting when you read or
listen to people active in feminist
organizations because they act as if women never
held important positions in our society, and yet
women have held important positions for a long,
into the last century. not as many, but certainly
numbers of them. And at this point in time, most
women must be in the market place at the same time
they are married, or else large numbers of
families could not be middle class. Do you feel
that these women in the workforce have obstacles
to overcome? I think there are obstacles. I don't
think there is a question that